README.md, before:

# Drum API

[![Contributor Covenant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Contributor%20Covenant-2.1-4baaaa.svg)](code_of_conduct.md)

**⚠️ EXPERIMENTAL / EARLY RELEASE VERSION ⚠️**

This is an experimental, early-release open source Python API for browsing CODATA fundamental physical constants. Built with FastAPI and backed by an RDF knowledge graph accessed via SPARQL queries, it provides rich semantic data with full content negotiation support. The data underlying this project is source from https://github.com/codata/drum-constants.

> **Note:** This project is in active development and should be considered experimental. APIs, data models, and features may change without notice. Not recommended for production use at this time.

## Features
- **RESTful API** built with FastAPI with automatic OpenAPI documentation
- **Content Negotiation** - HTML, JSON, and RDF formats (Turtle, N-Triples, N3, JSON-LD, RDF/XML, TriG)
- **SPARQL Backend** - RDF knowledge graph with semantic queries
- **CODATA Constants** - Fundamental physical constants from CODATA recommendations
- **Semantic Web** - Full RDF/linked data support with rich ontology relationships
- **Pydantic Models** - Type-safe data validation and serialization
- **HTML Templates** - Human-friendly browsing with Jinja2 templates
- **Hatch Project Management** - Modern Python packaging and development workflows
- **High-Performance** - Async API with efficient graph queries

## API Endpoints

### Resource Lists
- `GET /` - API welcome and overview
- `GET /concepts` - Browse all concepts (including quantities)
- `GET /quantities` - Browse all physical quantities
- `GET /constants` - Browse all fundamental constants
- `GET /units` - Browse all units of measurement
- `GET /constants/versions` - Browse all CODATA version releases

### Resource Details
- `GET /concepts/{id}` - Get concept details with relationships
- `GET /quantities/{id}` - Get quantity details with associated constants
- `GET /constants/{id}` - Get constant details with values across versions
- `GET /units/{id}` - Get unit details
- `GET /constants/versions/{id}` - Get version release information

### Advanced
- `GET /sparql` - Direct SPARQL query endpoint (query parameter: `q`)

All endpoints support content negotiation via `Accept` header or `?format=` query parameter.

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.11 or higher
- [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/) for project management

### Setup and Run

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd drum-api
   ```

2. Create the development environment:
   ```bash
   hatch env create
   ```

3. Run the API server:
   ```bash
   hatch run api
   ```

4. Visit the API:
   - HTML Browser: http://localhost:8000/
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs
   - Browse Constants: http://localhost:8000/constants

5. Run tests:
   ```bash
   hatch run test
   ```

## API Documentation
When running the API, automatic documentation is available at:
- Swagger UI: `http://localhost:8000/docs`
- ReDoc: `http://localhost:8000/redoc`

## Content Negotiation

All resource detail endpoints support multiple formats via the `Accept` header or `?format=` query parameter:

### Supported Formats

| Format | Accept Header | Query Parameter | Use Case |
|--------|--------------|-----------------|----------|
| HTML | `text/html` | `?format=html` | Human-readable browsing |
| JSON | `application/json` | `?format=json` | API integration (default) |
| JSON-LD | `application/ld+json` | `?format=jsonld` | Linked data / semantic web |
| Turtle | `text/turtle` | `?format=turtle` | RDF serialization |
| RDF/XML | `application/rdf+xml` | `?format=rdfxml` | RDF serialization |
| N-Triples | `application/n-triples` | `?format=ntriples` | RDF serialization |
| N3 | `text/n3` | `?format=n3` | RDF serialization |
| TriG | `application/trig` | `?format=trig` | RDF dataset serialization |

### Examples

Using Accept header:
```bash
# Get speed of light constant as Turtle
curl -H "Accept: text/turtle" http://localhost:8000/constants/speed-of-light-in-vacuum

# Get Planck constant as JSON-LD
curl -H "Accept: application/ld+json" http://localhost:8000/constants/planck-constant
```

Using query parameter:
```bash
# Get speed of light constant as Turtle
curl http://localhost:8000/constants/speed-of-light-in-vacuum?format=turtle

# Get Planck constant as JSON-LD
curl http://localhost:8000/constants/planck-constant?format=jsonld
```

### HTML Format Selector
When viewing resources in HTML format, a format selector in the top-right corner allows switching between all available formats.

## Project Structure
```
drum-api/
├── src/
│   ├── app.py              # FastAPI application with endpoints
│   ├── model.py            # Pydantic data models
│   ├── data/               # RDF data files (.ttl, .rdf)
│   ├── templates/          # Jinja2 HTML templates
│   └── static/             # Static assets (CSS, JS)
├── tests/
│   └── test_fastapi_app.py # API test suite
├── frontend/               # React frontend (optional)
│   ├── src/
│   ├── package.json
│   └── vite.config.js
├── pyproject.toml          # Project configuration and dependencies
├── gunicorn.conf.py        # Gunicorn production configuration
└── README.md
```

## Development

### Running with Uvicorn

The recommended way to run the API during development:

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

The `--reload` flag enables auto-reload on code changes.

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run tests with Hatch
hatch run test

# Or use pytest directly
pytest tests/
```

## Production Deployment

### Using Uvicorn with Workers

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --workers 4
```

### Using Gunicorn + Uvicorn Workers

For high-performance production deployment:

```bash
gunicorn src.app:app --worker-class uvicorn.workers.UvicornWorker --workers 4 --preload --bind 0.0.0.0:8100 --access-logfile - --error-logfile - --log-level info
```

Configuration is provided in `gunicorn.conf.py`.

### Subpath Hosting

The API fully supports deployment under a subpath (e.g., `https://api.example.org/drum-api/`).

**Method 1: Using `--root-path` flag**

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --root-path /drum-api --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

Then access at: `http://localhost:8000/drum-api/`

**Method 2: Behind Nginx reverse proxy**

```nginx
location /drum-api/ {
    proxy_pass http://localhost:8000/;
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
}
```

Run the app normally:
```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
```

Then access at: `https://yourdomain.com/drum-api/`

**Method 3: Behind Apache reverse proxy**

```apache
<Location /drum-api>
    ProxyPass http://localhost:8000/
    ProxyPassReverse http://localhost:8000/
    RequestHeader set X-Forwarded-Prefix /drum-api
</Location>
```

All HTML navigation, API endpoints, and content negotiation work correctly under subpaths.

## Data Sources

This API serves fundamental physical constants from:
- **CODATA** - Committee on Data of the International Science Council
- RDF knowledge graph with semantic relationships
- Constants include values, uncertainties, and version history

## Technology Stack

- **FastAPI** - Modern Python web framework
- **RDFLib** - RDF graph database and SPARQL queries
- **Pydantic** - Data validation and serialization
- **Jinja2** - HTML templating
- **Hatch** - Project management and packaging
- **Uvicorn** - ASGI server

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

Please ensure:
- Tests pass: `hatch run test`
- Code follows existing patterns
- API changes are documented

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add "Try It Now" section to README for API testing and feedback

README.md, after:

# Drum API

[![Contributor Covenant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Contributor%20Covenant-2.1-4baaaa.svg)](code_of_conduct.md)

**⚠️ EXPERIMENTAL / EARLY RELEASE VERSION ⚠️**

This is an experimental, early-release open source Python API for browsing CODATA fundamental physical constants. Built with FastAPI and backed by an RDF knowledge graph accessed via SPARQL queries, it provides rich semantic data with full content negotiation support. The data underlying this project is source from https://github.com/codata/drum-constants.

> **Note:** This project is in active development and should be considered experimental. APIs, data models, and features may change without notice. Not recommended for production use at this time.

## Try It Now

The API is available for testing, evaluation, and feedback at:
**https://api.codata.org/drum**

Explore the interactive playground and API documentation at the root endpoint.

## Features
- **RESTful API** built with FastAPI with automatic OpenAPI documentation
- **Content Negotiation** - HTML, JSON, and RDF formats (Turtle, N-Triples, N3, JSON-LD, RDF/XML, TriG)
- **SPARQL Backend** - RDF knowledge graph with semantic queries
- **CODATA Constants** - Fundamental physical constants from CODATA recommendations
- **Semantic Web** - Full RDF/linked data support with rich ontology relationships
- **Pydantic Models** - Type-safe data validation and serialization
- **HTML Templates** - Human-friendly browsing with Jinja2 templates
- **Hatch Project Management** - Modern Python packaging and development workflows
- **High-Performance** - Async API with efficient graph queries

## API Endpoints

### Resource Lists
- `GET /` - API welcome and overview
- `GET /concepts` - Browse all concepts (including quantities)
- `GET /quantities` - Browse all physical quantities
- `GET /constants` - Browse all fundamental constants
- `GET /units` - Browse all units of measurement
- `GET /constants/versions` - Browse all CODATA version releases

### Resource Details
- `GET /concepts/{id}` - Get concept details with relationships
- `GET /quantities/{id}` - Get quantity details with associated constants
- `GET /constants/{id}` - Get constant details with values across versions
- `GET /units/{id}` - Get unit details
- `GET /constants/versions/{id}` - Get version release information

### Advanced
- `GET /sparql` - Direct SPARQL query endpoint (query parameter: `q`)

All endpoints support content negotiation via `Accept` header or `?format=` query parameter.

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites
- Python 3.11 or higher
- [Hatch](https://hatch.pypa.io/) for project management

### Setup and Run

1. Clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd drum-api
   ```

2. Create the development environment:
   ```bash
   hatch env create
   ```

3. Run the API server:
   ```bash
   hatch run api
   ```

4. Visit the API:
   - HTML Browser: http://localhost:8000/
   - API Documentation: http://localhost:8000/docs
   - Browse Constants: http://localhost:8000/constants

5. Run tests:
   ```bash
   hatch run test
   ```

## API Documentation
When running the API, automatic documentation is available at:
- Swagger UI: `http://localhost:8000/docs`
- ReDoc: `http://localhost:8000/redoc`

## Content Negotiation

All resource detail endpoints support multiple formats via the `Accept` header or `?format=` query parameter:

### Supported Formats

| Format | Accept Header | Query Parameter | Use Case |
|--------|--------------|-----------------|----------|
| HTML | `text/html` | `?format=html` | Human-readable browsing |
| JSON | `application/json` | `?format=json` | API integration (default) |
| JSON-LD | `application/ld+json` | `?format=jsonld` | Linked data / semantic web |
| Turtle | `text/turtle` | `?format=turtle` | RDF serialization |
| RDF/XML | `application/rdf+xml` | `?format=rdfxml` | RDF serialization |
| N-Triples | `application/n-triples` | `?format=ntriples` | RDF serialization |
| N3 | `text/n3` | `?format=n3` | RDF serialization |
| TriG | `application/trig` | `?format=trig` | RDF dataset serialization |

### Examples

Using Accept header:
```bash
# Get speed of light constant as Turtle
curl -H "Accept: text/turtle" http://localhost:8000/constants/speed-of-light-in-vacuum

# Get Planck constant as JSON-LD
curl -H "Accept: application/ld+json" http://localhost:8000/constants/planck-constant
```

Using query parameter:
```bash
# Get speed of light constant as Turtle
curl http://localhost:8000/constants/speed-of-light-in-vacuum?format=turtle

# Get Planck constant as JSON-LD
curl http://localhost:8000/constants/planck-constant?format=jsonld
```

### HTML Format Selector
When viewing resources in HTML format, a format selector in the top-right corner allows switching between all available formats.

## Project Structure
```
drum-api/
├── src/
│   ├── app.py              # FastAPI application with endpoints
│   ├── model.py            # Pydantic data models
│   ├── data/               # RDF data files (.ttl, .rdf)
│   ├── templates/          # Jinja2 HTML templates
│   └── static/             # Static assets (CSS, JS)
├── tests/
│   └── test_fastapi_app.py # API test suite
├── frontend/               # React frontend (optional)
│   ├── src/
│   ├── package.json
│   └── vite.config.js
├── pyproject.toml          # Project configuration and dependencies
├── gunicorn.conf.py        # Gunicorn production configuration
└── README.md
```

## Development

### Running with Uvicorn

The recommended way to run the API during development:

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

The `--reload` flag enables auto-reload on code changes.

### Running Tests

```bash
# Run tests with Hatch
hatch run test

# Or use pytest directly
pytest tests/
```

## Production Deployment

### Using Uvicorn with Workers

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --workers 4
```

### Using Gunicorn + Uvicorn Workers

For high-performance production deployment:

```bash
gunicorn src.app:app --worker-class uvicorn.workers.UvicornWorker --workers 4 --preload --bind 0.0.0.0:8100 --access-logfile - --error-logfile - --log-level info
```

Configuration is provided in `gunicorn.conf.py`.

### Subpath Hosting

The API fully supports deployment under a subpath (e.g., `https://api.example.org/drum-api/`).

**Method 1: Using `--root-path` flag**

```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --root-path /drum-api --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

Then access at: `http://localhost:8000/drum-api/`

**Method 2: Behind Nginx reverse proxy**

```nginx
location /drum-api/ {
    proxy_pass http://localhost:8000/;
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
}
```

Run the app normally:
```bash
uvicorn src.app:app --host 127.0.0.1 --port 8000
```

Then access at: `https://yourdomain.com/drum-api/`

**Method 3: Behind Apache reverse proxy**

```apache
<Location /drum-api>
    ProxyPass http://localhost:8000/
    ProxyPassReverse http://localhost:8000/
    RequestHeader set X-Forwarded-Prefix /drum-api
</Location>
```

All HTML navigation, API endpoints, and content negotiation work correctly under subpaths.

## Data Sources

This API serves fundamental physical constants from:
- **CODATA** - Committee on Data of the International Science Council
- RDF knowledge graph with semantic relationships
- Constants include values, uncertainties, and version history

## Technology Stack

- **FastAPI** - Modern Python web framework
- **RDFLib** - RDF graph database and SPARQL queries
- **Pydantic** - Data validation and serialization
- **Jinja2** - HTML templating
- **Hatch** - Project management and packaging
- **Uvicorn** - ASGI server

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

Please ensure:
- Tests pass: `hatch run test`
- Code follows existing patterns
- API changes are documented

## License

MIT
